Israel says it is taking steps to
increase the flow of Aid into the Gaza
Strip through the port of ashdot but
tons of supplies have piled up on the
Gaza side of Israeli controlled border
crossings the UN says it is unable to
collect them for distribution as Israeli
military operations against Hamas make
it too dangerous to move
around for aluli family daily life is a
struggle against hunger and a worsening
sanitation crisis personal hygiene is
not something something they can
afford there's no soap no
deterent
nothing I mean the price of Soap even if
it is available in the Gaza Strip we
can't afford
it I don't have money to buy
soap they live in a refugee camp in
central Gaza here lack of sufficient
toilets clean water and a working suet
system are threatening everyone's head
I don't have money to buy food let alone
buy a bottle of shampoo or soap I have
LIC my hair due to lack of soap I'm an
adult
woman an adult woman brushes her hair
and lies come out of it why because we
don't have the supplies we need no one
takes care of
us despite mounting International
pressure on Israel the delivery of eight
into Gaza is still far short of what is
required Israel says it has made efforts
to ensure un agencies can make
deliveries and blames the UN for the
failure there are 14,000 pallets by the
UN that is stuck here and they are not
collecting so the UN decided not to
bring more trucks because they are not
picking it up and distributing so
meantime the private sector continue to
work and those trucks are private sector
from Gaza that is ordering importing
Goods into Gaza and distributing
but the UN says active fighting and
attacks from militia groups leave Aid
convoys
vulnerable Aid is being dropped off from
the Israeli side it is being left in an
area and then uh we and some private
sector uh entities are also picking up
the aid uh the trucks that uh the UN
trucks that are getting are picking up
Aid are doing it often at Great cost uh
because they are being uh either looted
or attacked
Israeli forces continue their fight
against Hamas a lack of administration
in Gaza has created widespread
lawlessness the attempt to transport 8
by SE has also not been successful the
US built Pier facilitating the entry of
eight was marred by challenges and is
now expected to be permanently
dismantled but these explanations don't
help people like the aluli family for
them delays in eight mean mean one thing
continued
suffering now let's bring in ARA Damon
she founded the international Network
for Aid relief and assistant in inara
and joins us from Istanbul ARA we just
saw the aluli family situation there in
Gaza how common is this scenario
there well I was just in Gaza about 10
days ago and I can tell you that that
what you've seen there is widespread it
is basically you see everywhere and you
actually end up seeing a lot worse than
that in a certain bizarre kind of dark
way if you have a tent you're considered
to be luckier than others because what
you also see is people squatting on top
of what was the rubble of their homes
very very few people actually have
access to proper toilet you see open
sewage running everywhere there is a
severe lack of clean drinking water
there is no ability to shower or bathe
yourself and it is absolutely impossible
to get supplies in you heard in that
report that you aired there from the
Israeli spokesperson putting the blame
on you know un organizations for not
going to pick up well that's not exactly
the whole full picture especially since
Israel continues to abdicate its
responsibilities towards ensuring the
safe delivery of humanitarian assistance
to a population that needs it the most
and then you have of course the mental
toll of all of this with the constant
displac the drones that are buzzing
overhead the constant bombings the
reality that nowhere is absolutely safe
look I've been in war zones for more
than 20 years right now and I have never
seen anything the likes of which I saw
in Gaza now with with luta's running
Riot Hamas intercepting Aid convoys with
soaring prices and shortages how does
your organization inara ensure Aid
reaches those most in
need well that's the problem and let me
explain a little bit more of the
Dynamics on the ground that whole
hamas's intercepting Aid convoys
narrative is not entirely what you see
that is actually prevalent in Gaza what
is actually prevalent in Gaza right now
what is actually preventing aid from
being picked up from where the Israelis
are dropping it off is Criminal gangs
and looters and a lot of it centers
around cigarette smuggling and it
happens on certain specific chunks of
road that are chunks of road that we can
only cross with Israeli approval they're
in something of a no man's land areas
that are not populated or currently
inhabited but have you know a number of
burnt out buildings bombed up buildings
on them and along these roads you see
gangs of mostly young men some more
organized than others that are carrying
batons a couple of them have machetes
they're burning tires and they have
whether it's you know pieces of metal or
tree trunks or whatever it is that they
thrust across the road to then block
loock a trucks coming through some of
them are looters for looting's sake they
want to loot and then sell on the market
but a good number of this criminal
activities actually stemming from the
fact that since the beginning since
October 7th Israel has banned the entry
of cigarettes to the Gaza Strip and as
such right now cigarette smuggling has
become a cash cow one single cigarette
costs between 17 to $25 so if you're
able to sneak say five cartons of
cigarettes onto to an aid truck that's
around a $20,000 payday now these gangs
are mostly only targeting Aid trucks
they're not targeting the commercial
trucks that are going in and this is
raising a lot of questions but obviously
you know Gaza has a lot of tribal
dynamics that exist between the Traders
and whatnot what eight organizations
have been asking for for quite some time
now is alternate routes to be able to
use to move the a because right now we
are restricted to the routes that Israel
permits us to use but there are other
Alternatives so to go straight back to
answering your question is how do we
ensure the safe delivery of Aid we can't
and that is a very big problem because
we cannot resolve this on our own we
need these alternative routes and we
need more security from the Israelis
over routes which are under their
control now there's other problems as
well can you tell us more on the
internal challenges within un agencies
we have heard about turf wars and
contract wrangling how does that affect
your your
work look we are a small organization we
stay well out of anything it is that you
know you may or may not um have heard
about look I I went to a number of the
coordination meetings there there did
not seem to be any sort of internal Turf
War and that sort of defies logic to a
certain degree because there is so much
need just about everywhere that there
there is absolutely no need for for that
sort of a dynamic to exist and actually
my own personal experience quite to the
contrary has been that various
organizations are are quite willing to
cooperate on the ground look as I was
saying you know we're a fairly small
organization and we rely on on the
support of other organizations to be
able to do what we need to get done but
we're also very hyperfocused on serving
the the communities that that need the
services that we're providing that range
from running you know psychosocial
activities for children to trying to
provide things like sanitary pads you
know baby diapers baby milk when we're
able to get it in um and and ensuring
that you know we're we're getting fresh
vegetables to to communities because
what we're having to do right now as Aid
organizations is because the aid itself
is not getting in but in the South for
example commercial trucks are we are
then able to purchase vegetables off the
market and then distributed that to to
the families that are in
need thank you very much then ala Damon
from
inara joining us now from Jerusalem is
sh low from the Norwegian Refugee
Council Shina uh first of all can you
tell us a bit more about the situation
with a distribution at the moment and is
there still a log Jam or is any Aid
reaching people in Gaza right
now very little Aid is reaching people
in Gaza at the current moment we
ourselves as the Norwegian Refugee
Council have not received Aid to our
warehouses in over two months since May
3rd and so we are Str struggling to
provide whatever assistance we can with
the limited materials we have there are
a plethora of challenges for us to be
able to access the aid that we have some
of which has entered the Gaza Strip but
we are unable to access because of
security issues some of which is still
waiting in pipelines outside of Gaza
waiting to enter but what we desperately
need is a cessation of hostilities so
that we can safely access our Aid and
safely distribute it to people who are
in need throughout all of Gaza right now
there there just aren't conditions that
make Distributing Aid possible for so
many organizations including
NRC now the UN says famine is spreading
throughout Gaza what more can you tell
us well what we're hearing from our
staff is that they themselves are
struggling to find basic uh food on the
on the market that prices remain high
there still is a liquidity crisis where
people do not have cash and because of
the great delays in getting in Aid and
then Aid agencies being able to access
and safely distribute that Aid we
um because of those delays oftentimes
food some of which has is expire is
expiring because of the fact that it's
waiting too long to get in it's
incredibly hot right now in Gaza and so
food is spoiling much quicker than than
in cooler Nations and so these it is not
at all surpris ring that that more and
more people are continuing to go hungry
each and every day now we've heard in
that report that people cannot afford
basic hygiene items like soap or shampoo
is there are there any effort to improve
uh access to that kind of
material NRC has been providing hygiene
kits and and which are in as as
indicated in the report in great Supply
because people are in desperate need um
particularly as more and more Flash and
sewage builds up in Gaza the conditions
are just completely
unsanitary uh and so we are continuing
to provide what assistance we can for
Hygiene kits but of course more aid
needs to be getting through and not only
does it need to be getting through these
Crossings but as I already said it needs
to be able to reach people that means we
need streets that are safe that are
secure that we can that are passable we
need um police officers who are
accompanying that Aid to make sure that
it is not looted and safely arrives at
its destination to not be targeted as
we've seen by Israeli forces um which
has created uh increased lawlessness on
the ground making it more and more
difficult for humanitarians to operate
Shan hello there spokeswoman for the
Norwegian Refugee Council in Jerusalem
thank you very much
Shina thank you